A quick trip through data in the sciences
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1223/

Carolyn Lauzon, AAAS Science and Technology Policy Fellow
  Finding bad data in medical images
  Garbage in, garbage out
    So is the input good/useful?
  Input: MRI
    About 30 full-head images
    800 slices
    50,000,000 pixels
  How do you define "good"?
    Boxplots help you see outliers
    Compare this data set's boxplot with the group/overall boxplot (or a standard/ideal boxplot, if you have one)
    Split up the brain into 25 regions and showed the boxplot comparisons as small multiples
      Easy to tell what's weird at a glance

Kathleen Ratcliff, AAAS Science and Technology Policy Fellow
  Using math to explain nature
  First step when learning about an unfamiliar data set: Plot it.
    What does it look like?
      Linear growth (steady)
      Exponential growth (rate of growth increasing exponentially)
      Sigmoid growth (limited growth--picks up and then levels off)
    Remember to see what it looks like with both linear and logarithmic y-axes.

Cynthia Hsu, AAAS Science and Technology Policy Fellow
  Quantifying and relating spatial patterns
  Insects kill each other two different ways
    Eating each other
    Laying their eggs inside or on top of each other
  First law of geography: "Everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things." -Waldo Tobler
  Translating patterns into math: pretty similar to translating it into words
    Grammar is different, symbols are different, but concepts are pretty similar.
  Calculate gamma (semi-variance) to get a variogram
    Afterward, see what different models look like to determine what fits best
      "Shopping at the model store"
      "Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful." -George E.P. Box, Norman R. Draper

Beth Duckles, AAAS Science and Technology Policy Fellow
  Qualitative data
  First and most important tool: Listen!
    People will tell you so much if you just listen to them and ask good questions.
  Take notes.
    Current project has about 1,000 pages of field notes
  Do analysis as you go.
    Take notes about how your data looks so far
    What is standing out to you while you're in the thick of it?
  If it's not messy, you're doing it wrong.
    Make some order out of the mess, but do that later.
    If there are contradictions or mistakes, that's fine--it's still data, and it still gives you something to think about.
  Think like an archaeologist.
    Dig, but don't become too attached to any particular place.
    You don't necessarily know what the questions are when you start.
  Go in circles.
    In other words, iterate!
  Tools
    Atlas.TI, MaxQDA, NVIVO
      Coding and intercoder reliability
      QCA/fuzzy sets
    Old school: highlighters and Post-It notes
      Lulu for publishing
      Personal indexing
    Scrivener
      Others prefer Evernote
    Zotero
      Automatic citation generation and screenshot tagging

Sarah Cohen, The New York Times
