What's the deal with data science?
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1230/

Chase Davis, The New York Times
Mark Hansen, Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism

Data
  How do we define it?
  How do we know we're in its presence?
  What kinds of substances or phenomena or objects do they represent?
  Lots of definitions if you search for them
    Many tech/math/statistics definitions
    Humanities refer to data versus capta
      "Capta is 'taken' actively while data is assumed to be a 'given' able to be recorded and observed"
    "Big Data" refers to lots of "volume, velocity and variety"
  What are the politics and ethics around data collection?

Data science
  Started in industry--sort of a cross between computer science and statistics
  http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/09/building-data-science-teams.html#what-makes-data-scientist
  "Weird kind of turf battle" between CS and statistics departments at universities when creating data science programs

Data literacy
  Functional literacy
    How do we do this?
  Critical literacy
    How is data a cultural artifact?
    Design cultures
    Use contexts
  Rhetorical literacy
    How do we talk about data?
    Persuasion
    Deliberation
    Reflection

Software is a model of the world that makes an argument about the world.

Ask questions at a completely different scale than you could before!
  "the wholesale theft of cool techniques by people way smarter than me" -Chase

A reporter's article is structured very differently than a computer scientist's paper.
  One suggests a form of the truth; the other suggests an interesting technique and leaves it at that.

In academe there's a tendency to use traditional data sets up to several decades old because they're familiar, and results can be compared.
  In journalism there's "a constant newness" that makes it necessary to always question your findings.

Try reframing some of your explanations in terms of geometry, which often is more intuitive to the layperson.
