The customized Census: How to use microdata when you just can't find the right table
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1139/

Katie Genadek, Minnesota Population Center
  Microdata vs. summary data
    Microdata
      Shows full range of responses for individuals
      Enable custom tables and sophisticated analyses
      Suppression
        Geography
        Truncation
        Item level suppression
    Summary data
      Premade or published tables of aggregate characteristics
      Enable examination of small geographic areas
      Suppression
        Limited content
        Grouped intervals
        Cell suppression

  Benefits of using microdata
    More detailed information than published tables
    Easy to explore various topics
    Answer specific questions
    Can look at change over time
    Run person- or household-level analyses
    Nationally representative

  IPUMS (Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, pronounced "ih-pums" because of "integrated")
    https://usa.ipums.org/usa/
    Collects and preserves data and coumentation
    Harmonizes data
    Makes it available for free

  IPUMS:
    Provides data in multiple formats
    Provides documentation
    Standardizes data cross years
    Provides extra calculated fields
    Makes data freely available online
    Provides user support

  Slightly more than 1 percent of IPUMS-USA's more than 30,000 data users are journalists
    Growing quickly, though

  Database includes public use microdata samples:
    U.S. decennial censuses (1850 to 2000)
    Complete-count dataset for 1880
    Linked samples (1850 to 1930)
    Samples from Puerto Rico (1910 to 2012)
    American Community Survey (2000 to 2012)

  American Community Survey
    Replaced long form of decennial census
      Demonstration stage from 2000 to 2004
      Full implementation since 2005
      Group quarters added 2006
    Rolling sample design
    Microdata samples:
      Full survey responses for 1 percent of U.S. population
      Includes one-year and multi-year samples

  Census and ACS variable topics
    Basic demographics
    Marriage
    Family structure
    Fertility
    Ethnicity
    Disability
    Education
    Work
    Income
    Migration
    Housing characteristics

  Geography limitations
    No confidentiality restrictions for samples prior to 1950
      No geographic limitation
    Samples from 1950 to 1970:
      Limited and inconsitent geographic identifiers
    Recent samples:
      State
      Some metropolitan areas
      County groups
      Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs)
        Include roughly 100,000 people
        Change over time
          Maps are available

  Online extraction system
    Users create custom data files
      Pick any samples or variables of interest
    Creates custom syntax for reading the data files into SPSS, Stata, SAS and CSV
      Labels variables and values within data
    Codebook available
    Record of extract is preserved on user account

  Online analysis system
    High-speed tabulation software developed at UC-Berkeley
    Allows for analysis of microdata without statistical package
    All analysis performed online
    Can analyze multiple years of data
    Help guides available online
    Tutorials: http://www.youtube.com/user/MPCIPUMS

  User support
    User forum: http://answers.popdata.org/
    Email: ipums@umn.edu

  Other MPC data projects:
    IPUMS-International
      Largest collection of publicly available individual-level census data
      Includes 74 countries
      Samples from 1960 to present
      Plan to process and release data for new countries each year
    IPUMS-CPS
      Current Population Survey
      All March supplement data (1962 through present)
        Most widely used CPS data
      Basic monthly surveys
        Samples from 1994 through 2010
        Fewer variables than March supplement
      Supplement data
        Voter registration
        Fertility
        Veterans
        Education
        Food security
        Tobacco use
        Volunteer
        Internet use
    National Historical Geographic Information System
      Summary tables for census data from 1790 through 2012
      Can identify aggregate characteristics for smaller geographic areas (tract, block, etc.)
      GIS boundary files available
      Time series summary tables available

Robert Gebeloff, The New York Times
  Tips for SDA: https://usa.ipums.org/usa/sda/
    Visualize what you want your results to look like (columns, rows), then build it with the interface.
    Search for variables in the code book for a while, but get familiar with how the variables are organized in the collapsible list.
  IPUMS standardizes the occupational codes that seem to change every few years at the Census Bureau.
  IPUMS calculates confidence intervals for you, which is awesome.
    Pay attention to these!
    Is it OK to report something with a large confidence interval? It depends.
      How are you portraying it? (It is an estimate.)
      Is the trend line really bumpy?
      Does it agree with other reporting?
  Example: Affordable Care Act and the Medicaid gap
    How do people below the poverty line differ between states that did and did not opt out of the Medicaid expansion?
    Problem: Census household poverty metrics differ from health care household poverty metrics.
      Households, mainly, are defined differently--often based on insurance dependent status.
      State Health Access Data Assistance Center (with IPUMS) released conversion information between the two.
    Problem: What low-income uninsured people still wouldn't be eligible for Medicaid?
      Undocumented immigrants, mainly.
      Pew Hispanic Center did some work on how to count this since the Census Bureau doesn't ask such things.
