Finding great stories in not-so-great nonprofits
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1136/

Kendall Taggart, The Center for Investigative Reporting
  http://slid.es/kendall/mining-nonprofit-data
  America's Worst Charities
    Someone noted that six very different charities all were listed at one address
      Small house in Florida
      All used same marketing firm
    How many times does this happen?
      Gathered 10 years' worth of fundraising data for several states
    Simple way to strengthen your story: Go back in time.
    Un-sexy, time-consuming steps
      Get to know the flaws in your data
        Ultimate guide: CARwash (http://jenster.com/carwash.pdf) by Jen LaFleur
      Develop a solid methodology
        Go from data to on-the-ground reporting and back again
        Share your pproach with at least three experts (ideally including your harshest critic) before publication
      Useful data-mining tools
        SQLite: free and easy to install; comes with OS X
        Use a database client (Navicat, SQLite plugin for Firefox)
        OpenRefine
  Form 990 basics
    Get Ron Campbell's tipsheet on the 990 from IRE (http://ire.org/resource-center/tipsheets/3496/).
    How much is the nonprofit spending on programs?
      Program expenses: Form 990, Part IX, Line 25, Column B
      Total expenses: Form 990, Part IX, Line 25, Column A
    Be careful of accounting tricks
      Gifts in kind (e.g., medical supplies sent abroad)
        Form 990, Schedule F
        Can just say what general kind of gift and what region it went to
          Pretty opaque
        Example: Following medical supplies to Guatemala
          $40 million of goods going to one charity in Guatemala
          Went there to see where it was going
            One warehouse, private security
      Joint cost allocations
        Lets charities count telemarketing as an "educational program"
          If they tell you anything educational on the call, it might count.
          Form 990, Part IX, Line 26
    Checklist of required schedules
      Starts on page 3 of Part IV
      Did you do business with a relative, give a loan to a director, etc.?
    Governance
      Part VI
      How is the nonprofit managed?
      Any relationship between board members, etc.?
  Beyond the 990
    State records
      IRS initially determines tax-exempt status, but it's generally up to states after that.
      Most states require any nonprofit raising money in that state--not just those based in that state--to register with a state agency.
      States are more likely to have audit information
        IRS audits relatively few (about 1 percent) of nonprofits
    Disciplinary actions
      http://charitysearch.apps.cironline.org/
        Includes about 8,000 regulatory actions taken by states
    IRS releases data now!
      http://www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Annual-Extract-of-Tax-Exempt-Organization-Financial-Data
    Charity Checker: http://tampabay.com/charitychecker/widget
  Story ideas
    What nonprofits in your coverage area report high levels of tax-exempt bond proceeds?
    What nonprofits have high professional fundraising fees?
    What nonprofits have had lots of disciplinary actions but still raise money in your area?

Luke Rosiak, citizenaudit.org
  http://slid.es/lukerosiak/searchable-form-990s-with-citizenaudit-org
  The competition
    GuideStar keeps putting more behind a paywall
    Foundation Center transcribes grants, but not comprehensively
  What CitizenAudit has:
    10 years of PDFs for every filer, obtained monthly from the IRS on DVDs and posted online.
      Even though many file electronically, they specifically make them images
    OCR'd four years' worth of 990s so they're fully text-searchable
    Simple structured-data downloads for IRS extracts they've made available (see Kendall's note above)
  Just search for any text in the 990
  Find funders
    Nonprofits don't have to disclose who gives to them, but they do disclose who they give to
    CitizenAudit has started putting these links together
      Don't just need to see one link of where the money goes--you can see pass-through orgs.
  Use this for routine backgrounding
    The Form 990 is a thorough disclosure with lots of interesting things.
    Active community members often show up in these.
      Use it even when you're not writing specifically about nonprofits.
  A person could be paid by several supposedly unrelated charities
    Look up people on CitizenAudit
  For developers:
    Database dumps of 10 years' worth of links to PDFs and total assets
    IRS extracts in simplified formats
    API lets you pass in an EIN and get back JSON
      Key and mercy required
  Went through a Sunlight grant to get this off the ground
    Now paying out of pocket to help maintain this service
