Cross-platform collaboration for data projects
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1240/

Lorie Hearn, inewsource
  inewsource's platforms: television, radio, Web
    Partly due to frequent work with KPBS
      San Diego area's NPR and PBS member station
  Some places in California pay a specific extra property tax (Mello-Roos) to handle school-related infrastructure
    Included about 250 districts in and around San Diego
    How much was that helping?
    What was the difference between what people on just opposite sides of the street or canyon were paying?
    Rolling investigation
      Get data
      Start with explanatory pieces
      Get community involved
      Explain how taxes are assessed
      Keep going deeper into the story
        "Keep peeling the layers off the onion"
    How are taxes spent?
      Looked at thousands of invoices
        Consultants
        Garbage disposal
        Catered lunches
        Administrative building
    Helped produce pieces both for TV and radio
    Lessons learned
      Map of property taxes loaded really slowly
      Every platform requires different storytelling
      Think about your partners, whose needs are your needs
      Get buy-in from graphics experts and animation experts
      Audiences:
        Radio: Tell me.
        TV: Show me.

Josh Kleinbaum, NBC Owned Television Stations group
  Anatomy of a cross-platform project: 50th anniversary of the JFK assassination
    Goal: Create a rich, interactive experience for the Dallas-Fort Worth station around the anniversary
      Decided to focus on mobile
    Questions:
      What do we have that nobody else does?
        Great archival video
          Station covered JFK's trip to Dallas and Fort Worth even before the assassination.
          Had video from the moment Air Force One landed until the motorcade left and beyond (LBJ's swearing in, Oswald's assassination)
      How can we leverage it?
      Who is the audience?
        Existing readers and viewers
        JFK buffs
        Expected "assassination tourists"
        How do we reach them?
          Help people consume that archival video from anywhere
    Building the experience
      Two key navigational elements
        Scrollable timeline
          Let user navigate by date and time
          Show events in chronological order
        Interactives maps
          One for the motorcade from Love Field to Parkland Memorial Hospital
          One for Lee Harvey Oswald's travel from the book depository to the Texas Theater
          Didn't end up using standard Google map
            Wanted additional functionality (insets, etc.)
            Current streets aren't the same as in 1963
    Collaboration and organization: Google spreadsheet
      Made it easy for teams in Dallas and New York City to keep track of content and keep things on schedule
    Cross-platform experience on the anniversary
      Three-hour broadcast special using archival content
      Livestreamed entire show in app and on desktop site
      JFK 50 app reached No. 17 in iTunes
        Only app from a local news organization in the top 50
    Five rules of the road
      Know your audience and what platform it uses, and plan your project around that. More than half of our audience is mobile, but data projects often are not mobile-friendly.
      Plan ahead. The data person/team should be involved in the project as early as possible.
      Use shared tools such as Google Docs to stay organized with your collaborators.
      Organize your data. Even for a project like JFK 50, which isn't data-centric, keeping our content well-organized and well-structured made it much easier to tell a meaningful story.
      When collaborating on a project, give everyone a sense of ownership.

John Walton, BBC Visual Journalism
  Profile of National Health Service in winter
    http://www.bbc.com/nhswinter
    Patient and ambulance wait times, etc.
  Best piece of advice: Get everyone involved early.
  Obtained data in two sets from NHS
    Daily emergency room statistics (published weekly)
    Special winter situation reports
  Maintained dedicated social media channels for the project
  Had plenty of visualization-heavy pages
    Some of the same concerns as CensusReporter: How does this work on different screens?
  What we learned
    Start in the same place
    Commit to the same goal
    What is your question?
    What resources are needed?
    What do you do with all of the content?
  Ought to have come up with a better archival strategy
    Had to balance that after the fact with the problem of not wanting to change the landing page URL
