Political framing: Computational analysis of rhetoric in large text datasets
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1135/

Al Johri, Northwestern University
Dhrumil Mehta

Goal: Use machine learning and natural language processing to conduct analysis of data that can help improve reporting and find stories

Motivation: George Lakoff and conceptual metaphors
  Metaphors underlie a lot of language
    Performance in association football
    War in American football
    "Time is money"
    Crime in immigration debate
      People can't literally be "illegal"
      Jobs can't literally be "stolen"
  Frame
    A net of words that models a stereotypical scenario
      All of these words are intimately related
    Wrote a word mining Wordnet 2.1 for words related to a frame
      e.g., "carrying", "robbing", "capturing", "circumstances" for crime
      Does this by asking some questions
        "Does this count as crime? Does that count as crime?"
    Interested in what frames occur in political rhetoric
      Specifically from the Congressional Record

Data set: 15 years' of speeches from the U.S. House of Representatives and U.S. Senate
  Mined from the Sunlight Foundation's Capitol Words API (http://capitolwords.org/api/1/)
  10,000 speeches per topic for seven topics

Multinomial Naïve Bayes Classifier
  TF-IDF-based multinomial naïve Bayes
  Approximately 70 percent accuracy (without boosting) to classify a novel speech
    Classification by chance among seven topics would be 14%, so this is pretty good
    20-fold cross-validation to determine accuracy figure

What's innovative?
  You traditionally would train a classifier on a set of speeches (units of text) to classify a novel speech (same type of unit of text) into the correct category.
  Instead, they feed rhetorical frames into the classifier to see what frames are correlated.
  Example: Not only is crime rhetoric used unusually often in immigration speeches, but it also is much more common in Republicans' speeches than in Democrats' speeches.

The vision:
  Do computational rhetorical analysis with any deliberative body at any level of government
  Compare and contrast rhetoric of different parties
  Follow particular politicians' rhetoric
  Analyze changes over time and find key pivot points (e.g., Sept. 11 attacks)
  Cross-reference with campaign finance data, voting behavior data, etc.
