How to deal with millions of documents without losing your mind (and time)
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1243/

Sebastian Mondial, Die Zeit

Watch out for data privacy when you get documents with people's personal information
  Know the law
  Consider encryption

Elevator pitch for non-believers
  Everyone (including agencies) have become hoarders
  Search makes it easier than simply putting stuff in folders
  Disk is cheap, time is not
  It's already too late not to do this
  We still are promised AI to do some of this
  Sooner or later you'll end up with a hard drive full of stuff anyway

When you're searching/filtering, every match/exclusion counts
  Brute-force comparison of each pair of files gets crazy.

Keep a data diary!
  Write down what you do!
  Use flat text and time stamps
  Reflect what kind of step (transformation, destruction, etc.) it is and label it
  What would an undo look like?
  Keep the notes _with_ the data for storage.

Copying files isn't enough when you receive a hard drive of documents
  You want to maintain the metadata that's kept within the file system.
  Duplicate the hard drive using dedicated hardware
    Write blockers, forensic equipment, etc. all have their uses
    If you use a disk duplicator, PAY ATTENTION to which one is the source and which is the destination.
      You only make this mistake once, since if you make it, you lose all of your source data.
  Use the fastest hardware (HDs, interfaces, etc.) you and/or your company can afford.
  Hidden and deleted data also is important!
    All the more reason to copy the drive bit for bit (not just the files you can see on your computer)
    Cheap thing to learn--used hard drives are cheap and often improperly wiped (if at all)

Discover what is hidden
  Undelete software is cheap/free
  Recovery on a physical level is really expensive
    "SSD recovery is currently witchcraft"
    Don't believe people who say they can restore data from encrypted drives.

Write block
  Make sure the drive (or your copy of it) is mounted as read-only
  Also can use a write blocker to be extra sure
    Nice thing about some hardware write blockers: Can lie to the operating system by saying stuff can be written/edited
    Some hard-drive enclosures include write blockers

Air gap
  You don't know what was on that machine
    Viruses, other malware, etc.
    Triggers that let others know when the files are accessed
  Never connect your data analysis machine to the network!
    If you really don't want to buy a second computer, consider

Trees and hashes
  A tree is how your file system hierarchically organizes its files
  Know the possible issues:
    Links (symbolic or hard)
      References to one file from somewhere else
      Make it a bit more complicated than just a basic tree
    Some file systems have limits on what can be stored in the root (base) directory.
    File name limits (remember 8.3?)
    How hidden/system files are handled
  A hash is a checksum--some fingerprint of the file's contents
    Gives you some unique identifier for the file other than just its location in the filesystem
    Makes it easier to detect duplicates, too!
    Utilities
      md5deep works recursively
  Create a spreadsheet of files' paths and their corresponding hashes
    Detect duplicates
    Always know exactly what file you're talking about

File system metadata
  Creation date: When did this file get here?
  Modification date: When was it last changed?
  Last accessed date: When was it last used?
    Print, move, copy, view, etc.
    Only specifically handling this particular file--not just seeing it in the Finder or equivalent
  Access rights
  Owner
  Read-only?
  Archive?
    Means it has not been backed up before
  System?
  Hidden?
  Extended attributes
    Just check Wikipedia
  Quick shoutout for the "file" tool in Unix-based systems (including Macs!)
    file <file name>
    Regardless of what the name/extension _says_ it is, "file" tool analyzes the contents to determine (or at least guess) what it actually is.

What do you do with old files?
  Search for "abandonware" or "vintage software" to get old file viewers/editors
  Many run in DOSBox, which is cross-platform DOS virtualization program

What if it's a boot drive?
  You can make a virtual machine run off of it, which means you can see what the user would have seen.

Look at summary statistics of the files
  What files/folders are the biggest?
  What types of files are most common?
  How old are the different files?
  If you can search/filter images by EXIF data, filter by what device created the images.
    Make/model (/serial number?)
  Also consider filtering PDFs by what software created them.

Archive extraction
  If you have an email archive file (like an Outlook file), use some utility such as Emailchemy to extract all of the individual files/emails from it to make it easier to search with other tools.

Quick way to detect searchable text in PDFs: Use pdffonts (from xpdf) to see whether any fonts are used in the document.

Useful indexing/search tool: DT-Search
  About $200
  Windows

What to do next
  https://github.com/melix/jlangdetect
    Detect language for each file
  PIPI longstrings
    What files share content?
  Similarity
    diff (file differences) utility
  Stylometry
    Whose writing styles are in the data set?
  Ask on Quora
  Annie
    http://gate.ac.uk/sale/tao/splitch6.html#chap:annie
  Freeling
    http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/demo/demo.php
  Freebase
    http://www.freebase.com/
  OpenCalais
  Overview
  Just words
    http://www.wordfrequency.info/free.asp
  Summarize
  Bayesian classifiers

How can you fail?
  Overwrite your source data
    You're screwed if this happens--can't fix this.
  Mix up columns
    Inconsistent analysis sucks.
  Interpret the data incorrectly
    Get a second opinion.
  Miss the obvious
  Get fooled by a forgery
  Aim too high
    You won't do everything perfectly, especially when OCR's involved.

Consider purging the metadata from the files before posting anything to the Web
  Might still have information that incriminates someone else

If you have "money, luck or both", you might be able to get "integrated e-discovery software" such as that used by attorneys.
  Watch out, though, because some of these have time-limited licenses and prevent you from even seeing your previous analyses if your license lapses.
