It's not on the exam: Exploring data beyond standardized tests on the education beat
http://ire.org/events-and-training/event/973/1197/

Meredith Broussard, Temple University
  The story discovery engine: artificial intelligence for public affairs reporting
    AI is not robots taking over the world
    Real life is reporters having computers
      This causes constraints
    Journalists' work is hard!
    Rather than having a program do all of your work for you, have it help accelerate your investigations.
    Example: Are there enough books in schools?
      The public school system
        Standards
          Federal
          State
          Local
        Curriculum materials
          Books that implement these standards
          Published by one of a few big publishers
            Houghton Mifflin Harcourt had $1.3 million of revenue in 2012
              35 percent market share
            Publishers make the books, write the tests, grade the tests
      Expert system
        Type of AI construct
          Human expert adds content to a knowledge base
          Knowledge base connects to an inference engine
          Non-expert user can query the inference engine to access knowledge base content
      http://stackedup.org/: look up a (Philadelphia) school and find details about whether it has enough books, etc.
        System computes this for every grade in each of 241 schools

Coulter Jones, WNYC
  SchoolBook
    Data on 1,800 New York City public schools
    Compare schools against similar schools
    Designed with parents' school choice in mind
    Doesn't easily answer all the questions parents have about their schools
      What is a school?
      How does the system work?
      What's successful?
      etc.
  Cover schools like communities, not like grade factories
    Seek out different data, or use a different lens for the same data.
    Get around the "culture war" of education policy, and cover what parents want to know.
  Attendance
    Low attendance on snowy days, Lunar New Year
    Parents make conscious decisions regardless of schools' plans
    Federal and state funding formulas often depend on attendance
      Some schools game the system
    NYC reports attendance for every school on every day
  Schedule
    When does school start and end?
    When is lunch?
    When are after-school programs?
    Who makes those decisions?
    How does that affect learning and other stuff?
    NYC DOE claimed not to have schedule data easily available
      Scraped it instead
    Provided snapshot of daily parental decisions and other issues
  Nearby environmental quality
    Safety (crime, traffic accidents)
    Health (air quality, EPA data)
    Area type (zoning, nearby business licenses)
  Getting to school
    When and where do kids get hit by cars and trucks?
    Where are crossing guards?
    Compared accidents to similar accidents involving adults getting hit
    55 percent of all NYC streets are within one-quarter mile of a school
      75 percent in Manhattan
    How else do kids get to school?
      School buses
        Who has the contract?
        Who are the drivers?
          Accident reports
            Obtained the form bus drivers fill out afterward
          Criminal histories
  Safety of school buildings
    "On Shaky Ground"
      California has extra earthquake-related building codes for schools
        How's compliance?
    Inspections
    Complaints
      Who handles them?
    How does something get fixed?
      How long does this take?
    Health violations
    Neighboring buildings
      Rats in NYC
